Armenia is a unitary, multi-party, democratic nation-state 
with an ancient cultural heritage. The first Armenian 
state of Urartu was established in 860 BC, and by the 6th 
century BC it was replaced by the Satrapy of Armenia. 
The Kingdom of Armenia reached its height under Tigranes 
the Great in the 1st century BC and in the year 301 became 
the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its 
official religion. Armenia still recognises 
the Armenian Apostolic Church, the world's oldest national 
church, as the country's primary religious establishment.
The ancient Armenian kingdom was split between the Byzantine 
and Sasanian Empires around the early 5th century. 
Under the Bagratuni dynasty, the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia
was restored in the 9th century before falling in 1045.
An Armenian principality and later a kingdom Cilician Armenia 
was located on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea between the 
11th and 14th centuries. 
Between the 16th and 19th centuries, the traditional Armenian 
homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia 
came under the rule of the Ottoman and Persian empires, 
repeatedly ruled by either of the two over the centuries. By the 
19th century, Eastern Armenia had been conquered by the Russian 
Empire, while most of the western parts of the traditional 
Armenian homeland remained under Ottoman rule. During World War I, 
1.5 million Armenians living in their ancestral lands in 
the Ottoman Empire were systematically exterminated in the Armenian 
genocide. In 1918, following the Russian Revolution, all
non-Russian countries declared their independence after the Russian 
Empire ceased to exist, leading to the establishment of 
the First Republic of Armenia. By 1920, the state was incorporated 
into the Soviet Union. The modern Republic of Armenia became 
independent in 1991 during the dissolution of the Soviet Union. 
Armenia is a developing country and ranks 85th on the Human Development 
Index (2021). Its economy is primarily based on industrial output 
and mineral extraction. While Armenia is geographically located 
in the South Caucasus, it is generally considered geopolitically 
European. Since Armenia aligns itself in many respects geopolitically 
with Europe, the country is a member of numerous European organizations 
including the Council of Europe, the Eastern Partnership, Eurocontrol, 
the Assembly of European Regions, and the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development. Armenia ranked 63rd out of 180 countries on Environmental 
Performance Index (EPI) in 2018. Its rank on subindex Environmental Health 
(which is weighted at 40% in EPI) is 109, 
while Armenia's rank on subindex of Ecosystem Vitality (weighted at 60% in EPI) 
is 27th best in the world. 
This suggests that main environmental issues in Armenia are with population health, 
while environment vitality is of lesser concern. 
Out of sub-subindices contributing to Environmental Health subindex 
ranking on Air Quality to which population is exposed 
is particularly unsatisfying. Waste management in Armenia is underdeveloped, 
as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at Armenia's 60 landfills. 
A waste processing plant is scheduled for construction near Hrazdan city, 
which will allow for closure of 10 waste dumps.
Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia 
(especially hydroelectric and wind power) and calls from EU 
officials to shut down the nuclear power plant at Metsamor, the Armenian 
Government is exploring the possibilities of installing 
new small modular nuclear reactors. In 2018 existing nuclear plant is 
scheduled for modernization to enhance its safety and increase 
power production by about 10%.
The climate in Armenia is markedly highland continental. Summers are 
hot, dry and sunny, lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature 
fluctuates between 22 and 36 °C (72 and 97 °F). However, the low humidity 
level mitigates the effect of high temperatures. Evening breezes blowing down 
the mountains provide a welcome refreshing and cooling effect. Springs are short, 
while autumns are long. Autumns are known for their vibrant and colourful foliage.
Winters are quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures ranging between 
−10 and −5 °C (14 and 23 °F). Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing down the hills 
of Tsaghkadzor, located thirty minutes outside Yerevan. Lake Sevan, nestled up in the 
Armenian highlands, is the second largest lake in the world relative to its altitude, 
at 1,900 metres (6,234 ft) above sea level.
Armenia is divided into ten provinces (marzer, singular marz), with the city (kaghak) 
of Yerevan having special administrative status as the country's capital. 
The chief executive in each of the ten provinces is the marzpet (marz governor), appointed 
by the government of Armenia. In Yerevan, the chief executive is the mayor, elected since 2009.
Within each province there are communities (hamaynkner, singular hamaynk). Each community 
is self-governing and consists of one or more settlements (bnakavayrer, singular bnakavayr). 
Settlements are classified as either towns (kaghakner, singular kaghak) or villages 
(gyugher, singular gyugh). As of 2007, Armenia includes 915 communities, of which 49 are 
considered urban and 866 are considered rural. The capital, Yerevan, also has the status 
of a community. Additionally, Yerevan is divided into twelve semi-autonomous districts.
Research spending is low in Armenia, averaging 0.25% of GDP over 2010–2013. However, the 
statistical record of research expenditure is incomplete, as expenditure by privately 
owned business enterprises is not surveyed in Armenia. The world average for domestic 
expenditure on research was 1.7% of GDP in 2013.
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD) to GDP ratio for the Black Sea countries, 
2001–2013. Source: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), Figure 12.3.
The country's Strategy for the Development of Science 2011–2020 envisions that 
'by 2020, Armenia is a country with a knowledge-based economy and is competitive 
within the European Research Area with its level of basic and applied research.
It fixes the following targets:
Creation of a system capable of sustaining the development of science and technology;
Development of scientific potential, modernization of scientific infrastructure;
Promotion of basic and applied research;
Creation of a synergistic system of education, science and innovation; and
Becoming a prime location for scientific specialization in the European Research Area.
Based on this strategy, the accompanying Action Plan was approved by the government 
in June 2011. It defines the following targets:
Improve the management system for science and technology and create the requisite conditions 
for sustainable development;
Involve more young, talented people in education and research, while upgrading research infrastructure;
Create the requisite conditions for the development of an integrated national innovation system; and
Enhance international co-operation in research and development.
GERD in the Black Sea region by sector of performance, 2005 and 2013. Source: UNESCO 
Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), Figure 12.5.
Although the Strategy clearly pursues a 'science push' approach, with public research 
institutes serving as the key policy target, it nevertheless mentions the goal of establishing
an innovation system. However, the main driver of innovation, the business sector, is not mentioned.
In between publishing the Strategy and Action Plan, the government issued a resolution in May 2010 
on Science and Technology Development Priorities for 2010–2014. These priorities are:
Armenian studies, humanities and social sciences;
Life sciences;
Renewable energy, new energy sources;
Advanced technologies, information technologies;
Space, Earth sciences, sustainable use of natural resources; and
Basic research promoting essential applied research.
The Law on the National Academy of Sciences was adopted in May 2011. This law is expected to 
play a key role in shaping the Armenian innovation system. It allows the National Academy of Sciences 
to extend its business activities to the commercialization of research results and the creation of 
spin-offs; it also makes provision for restructuring the National Academy of Sciences by combining 
institutes involved in closely related research areas into a single body. Three of these new centres 
are particularly relevant: the Centre for Biotechnology, the Centre for Zoology and Hydro-ecology 
and the Centre for Organic and Pharmaceutical Chemistry.
The government is focusing its support on selected industrial sectors. More than 20 projects have 
been cofunded by the State Committee of Science in targeted branches: pharmaceuticals, 
medicine and biotechnology, agricultural mechanization and machine building, electronics, 
engineering, chemistry and, in particular, the sphere of information technology.
Over the past decade, the government has made an effort to encourage science–industry 
linkages. The Armenian information technology sector has been particularly active: a 
number of public–private partnerships have been established between companies and universities, 
in order to give students marketable skills and generate innovative ideas at the interface of 
science and business. Examples are Synopsys Inc. and the Enterprise Incubator Foundation. 
Armenia was ranked 69th in the Global Innovation Index in 2021, down from 64th in 2019.